Title: Life: An optimization approach
date: 2021-03-21
comments: True
slug: life-optimization
tags:

I have been thinking about how to optimize making decisions in life. Its is
quite a difficult problem as there are so many unknowns with constantly
changing motivation factors. In addition to that, it is also influenced by
things that we have no control over. But overall I think humans try to optimize
the overall happiness in life. I don't think it's the feeling can be described
as happiness but for the sake of the argument let's call it happiness as a
don't think it would matter for the rest of the discussion. So, to state the
problem of life in mathematical form, we are looking to solve:

$$ \max \int t h_{t}(\mathbf{x}) $$

I think this function is able to capture the essence of the human life problem.
We have a function $ h_{t} $ which depends on a lot of different factors $
\mathbf{x} $ and the function $ h_{t} $ tells us the state of "happiness" at
any given time $ t $. The different factors $ \mathbf{x} $ does also change
with time. The function $ h_t $ is unique for every human as different people
have different things that make them happy.  We ideally would like to find the
the global maxima of our function $ h_{t} $ for each time point and always try
to stay at that point. So, the problem gets to knowing the function space $
h_{t} $ well enough to make optimal decisions. But as we know given that enough
number of factors are involved, it is a computationally intractable problem to
have a good enough idea of our function space. It is inherently an
exploitation-vs-exploration problem similar to the ones that we see in
reinforcement learning. The idea behind this problem is that let's say we are
at a decently "happy" state in life (i.e. we found a local maxima of our $ h_t
$), do we exploit it by spending all our time at that point, or do we keep on
exploring in search for finding an even better maxima point. Some people prefer
the exploitation approach and others try to keep on exploring which leads to
two persoanlity types:

1. The stable life choice: In this category are the people who have acheived
   things in life and are fairly happy with it. They are at one of their local
   maximas, and they prefer to exploit this and want to stay there for as long 
   as it is possible.

2. The ambitious life choice: The other type of people are constantly looking
   for a better (i.e. higher) maxima. So, they choose to keep on exploring
   trying to find their global maximas instead of exploiting their local
   maximas.  The problem with this approach is that since our function space is
   intractable, there is no end to the exploration. Even if a person is at their
   global maxima there is no way of knowing whether it's global or just a local.
   People in this category would end up spending a lot of their time in deep 
   troughs, as the paths from one maxima to another can have huge dips.

I have obviously described the two extremes of these behaviors and humans are
much more complicated and everyone is always doing a combination of exploration
and exploitation (same as what we do in reinforcement learning). It's just the
ratio of this changes for people. I will get into more detail about it when
talking about optimization problems later on.

So, the question comes to then how do we maximize this function? Well, the
people in the field of optimization in mathematics have done a lot of work
on designing algorithms to find optimas in complex equations. Maybe we can 
take some help from there. Starting with the most basic one:

1. Gradient Descent: The gradient descent is a fairly simple algorithm. The
   idea is to at any given point take a step in the direction of highest slope.
   In terms of life, this would be to just take the step in the directly which
   gives you instant gratisfaction. This approach obviously has the problem 
   that it will get you stuck at the nearest maxima for life. This approach 
   obviously isn't able to also look for longer term maximas either.

2. Gradient Descent with momentum:
3. Nestrov Momentum:
4. AdaGrad:
5. RMSProp: 
6. Adam:
7. BFGS:

Points:
Flat regions when we feel our life isn't moving and feeling stuck.

